Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"
Language selection
Français
/ Gouvernement du Canada
Search
Search Canada.ca
Search
Menu
MAIN
MENU 
You are here:
Canada.ca National Defence Policies and standards Defence Administrative Orders and Directives Defence Administrative Orders and Directives (DAOD ) - 5000 DAOD 5009 - Table of Contents
DAOD 5009-1, Personnel Readiness Verification Screening
Table of Contents
Introduction
Definitions
Abbreviations
Overview
Compliance and Consequences
Responsibilities
References

Top of page

1. Introduction

Date of Issue: 2017-04-24

Date of Last Modification: 2024-02-23

Application: This DAOD is an order that applies to officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Armed Forces in the Regular Force (Reg F) and the Primary Reserve (P Res) (CAF members).

Supersession:

CANFORGEN 164/05, Provision of Personal Information to Military Family Resource Centres
CANFORGEN 177/05, Screening Policy for Out of Canada (OUTCAN) and Isolated Unit Posting

Approval Authority: Chief of Military Personnel (CMP)

Enquiries: Administrative Response Centre (ARC)

Top of page

2. Definitions

augmentee (renfort)

A military member tasked to augment an established unit. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 24252)

deployment (déploiement)

The movement of forces to an area of operations or a training area. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 18942)

high-tempo position (poste à rythme opérationnel élevé)

A position whose incumbent is routinely deployed on tasks of 1 to 60 days, primarily to special duty areas or special duty operations. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 27885)

high-tempo unit (unité à rythme opérationnel élevé)

A unit that is routinely deployed on tasks of 1 to 60 days, primarily to special duty areas or special duty operations. (Defence Terminology Bank record 27884)

readiness (préparation)

The state of being appropriately prepared to meet specific personal, professional, and operational demands. (Defence Terminology Bank record number 27069)

Top of page

3. Abbreviations
Abbreviation	Complete Word or Phrase
CANSOFCOM (COMFOSCAN)	Canadian Special Operations Forces Command
CDIO (DCOI)	Canadian Joint Operations Command Directives for International Operations
CJOC (COIC)	Canadian Joint Operations Command
CM (GC)	career manager
CMTFE (ÉCPTMC)	Common Military Tasks Fitness Evaluation
CO (cmdt d’unité)	commanding officer
CoC (CdC)	chain of command
Comd (cmdt)	commander
FORCE (FORCE)	Fitness for Operational Requirements of CAF Employment
HRMS (SGRH)	Human Resources Management System
HTP (PROE)	high tempo position
HTU (UROE)	high tempo unit
L1 (N1)	level one
MASS (SSAM)	Military Administrative Support System
MFRC (CRFM)	Military Family Resource Centre
MHRRP (FDRHM)	Military Human Resources Record Procedures
OUTCAN (HORSCAN)	outside Canada
PRV (VEPP)	personnel readiness verification
SDB (PSD)	supplementary death benefit
VCDS (VCEMD)	Vice Chief of the Defence Staff

Top of page

4. Overview
Context

4.1 All CAF members are liable to perform general military duties and are required to meet CMTFE standards in accordance with DAOD 5023-0, Universality of Service. They must also, to the extent of available resources, undergo PRV basic screening to ensure that they meet the necessary military requirements of employability and deployability, thus enabling an increase in the overall readiness of the CAF. The CAF has a responsibility to ensure that all CAF members undergo required PRV screening for selection and assignment to designated taskings, postings and deployments, regardless of the duration or degree of notice.

4.2 PRV screening is the process by which the readiness of a CAF member for a designated tasking, posting or deployment is confirmed in terms of qualifications, physical and mental health, and domestic factors. There are also several administrative requirements for which PRV screening must be completed. The status of PRV checklist items is set out in the PRV screening report, which provides Comds with a summary of the readiness of their CAF members. See paragraph 4.7 for the complete PRV checklist.

PRV Tiers

4.3 There are the following two PRV tiers, each containing two parts:

Tier 1 – Annual verification requirements:
Part 1 – Basic readiness verification;
Part 2 – Unique military occupation and environment-specific requirements;
Tier 2 – Mission specific readiness:

Part 3 – Enhanced readiness verification items for deployed operations; and
Part 4 – Post-deployment reintegration.

Note – Tier 2 requirements are set by the CoC or may be included in the joining instructions or the Canadian Forces Task Plans and Operations for the specific task.

Requirements for PRV Screening

4.4 All CAF members must ensure that all Part 1 PRV checklist items are verified, current and updated. CAF members selected for any of the following deployments or postings must complete the enhanced PRV screening in Tier 2, or as indicated in mission-specific orders:

a domestic or international operational deployment, as specified in a tasking order;
an unaccompanied operational posting of 365 days or more;
a posting to a HTU or HTP;
an OUTCAN posting; or
an isolated or semi-isolated posting.

Frequency of PRV Screening

4.5 On an annual basis, the CO of a Reg F or P Res unit must ensure that the Part 1 PRV screening of their CAF members is conducted in accordance with the PRV checklist. In addition to the annual verification, CAF members must verify that the status of these PRV checklist items are completed or updated:

within one month of reporting for duty on a posting;
when personal circumstances change that may have a potential effect on their readiness; and
on completion of relevant training, FORCE Evaluation or CMTFE, and medical and dental examinations.

Posting Extensions

4.6 L1 advisors and Comds must implement appropriate measures to ensure that adequate supplementary screening measures are employed when a CAF member is required or requests an extension to a posting if initial screening was required for an OUTCAN posting or an isolated or semi-isolated location.

PRV Checklist Items

4.7 The PRV checklist items listed in the table below are described in detail in the MHRRP Topic 33. The most current information for these items is to be entered in the Person Assignment Checklist in HRMS by either orderly room staff or other authorized personnel in order to produce accurate PRV screening reports.

Tier	Part	Checklist Items
Tier 1 – Annual verification requirements	
Part 1 – Basic readiness verification
	
Medical:
immunizations for North America; and
medical category.
Dental.
Orderly room:
Form CF 30-1-E, Will, or Form CF 30-3-E, Will Certificate;
Form CF 742, Emergency Contact(s) Notification;
Form CF-FC 2196 (PWGSC), Naming or substitution of a beneficiary (for SDB) (if applicable);
Form DND 2105, Designation of Memorial Cross Recipients;
Form DND 2587, Next of Kin (NOK) Identification;
Form DND 2886-E, Family Care Plan (FCP) Declaration;
terms of service;
MFRC Information on family support (see the Note below);
passport information;
remedial measures verification;
Monitor Mass – unit training activities and other essential personal data; and
power of attorney verification and information.
Transport:
Form DND 404, Driver Permit; and
civilian driver’s license (if applicable).
Personnel Support Program staff:
FORCE Evaluation or CMTFE.
Security Section:
security clearance verification;
 identification card; and
 identification disk.
 Training:
 weapons handling;
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear training;
first aid training; and
 portable fire extinguisher training.
 Photograph or media portrait in accordance with A-PH-007-000/AG-001, Canadian Armed Forces Unclassified Imagery Instructions.

Note – To enhance CAF readiness by providing a range of activities and services under the Military Family Services Program, including the provision of outreach, information, support and assistance to the family of a CAF member, CAF members are encouraged to share their Family Care Plan Declaration to the supporting MFRC in order to facilitate the provision of support by the MFRC. Any personal information shared with the MFRC is protected by the Privacy Code of the Military Family Services Program and applicable privacy legislation. 


Tier 1 	

Part 2 – Unique military occupation and environment-specific requirements

	
Unique military occupation requirements.
Navy environment-specific requirements.
Army environment-specific requirements.
Air force environment-specific requirements.
CANSOFCOM unique and specific requirements.

Note – These items are only completed when ordered by the CoC.


Tier 2 – Mission specific readiness	

Part 3 – Enhanced readiness verification items (Departure Assistance Group and mission specific screening)

	
Medical:
mission-specific immunizations; and
assessment by medical officer.
Social worker or chaplain psychosocial assessment:
conscientious objection; and
restrictions of duty.
Supply – personal clothing and equipment.
Orderly room:
Class “C” Reserve Service period of service initiated (if applicable) (see Note 1 below);
power of attorney;
Service Income Security Insurance Plan;
Public Service Health Care Plan and Canadian Forces Dental Care Program (if applicable) (see Notes 1 and 2 of MHRRP topic 33);
leave audit;
hand-carry of documents;
CO’s certification confirming the review of the CAF member’s file, including any waivers (see Note 2 below), that there is no reason the CAF member should not proceed on a deployment and that all HRMS entries are completed; and
MFRC information on family support.

Note 1 – The period of Class “C” Reserve Service includes the pre-deployment training and the post-deployment leave period.

Note 2 – A CAF member may submit a request to CJOC for the waiver of a Part 3 requirement (see the CJOC J7 Mission Training SharePoint Home Page (available in English only)).


 	Part 4 – Post-deployment reintegration	
Post-deployment reintegration requirements as determined by CJOC or CANSOFCOM, as applicable, for implementation by the:
task force commander for phase 1 (in theatre) and phase 2 (decompression);
officer commanding the Arrival Assistance Group for phase 3 (immediate post-deployment administration); and
unit CO for phase 4 (post-deployment) follow-up activities.
MFRC Information on family support 


Note 1 – For CJOC operations, see the CDIO 1000 Series, Section 3, Personnel Administration.

Note 2 – For CANSOFCOM operations, see the CANSOFCOM Commander’s Directive 27-07, Reintegration and Decompression. (only available on the Joint Staff Information System)

Status of PRV Checklist Items

4.8 The status of each PRV checklist item is colour coded as follows:

green – item is current and the CAF member meets the requirement;
yellow – item is expired and the CAF member does not meet the requirement but the item may be completed within 30 days; 
red – item is expired, the CAF member does not meet the requirement and the item cannot be completed within 30 days; and
gray – item is not applicable or does not impact the readiness of the CAF member.

Note 1 – A yellow or red status may be assigned by medical staff for medical or psychosocial readiness to inform the CoC that there is a risk of a condition which may lead to early repatriation. This information enables the CoC to decide to either accept the risk or cancel the posting or tasking. Waiver requests for training requirements are processed through CJOC.

Note 2 – Any disagreement between the assessments of the gaining unit CO and the unit records support CO with regard to medical, dental or dependant education is resolved in accordance with the VCDS OUTCAN direction in form DND 4064-E, Outside of Canada (OUTCAN) Posting - Screening Checklist.

Minimum PRV Screening Requirements

4.9 The following table identifies the minimum requirements for each type of PRV screening:

Type of PRV Screening	Requirements
Basic Readiness Verification	
Completion by Reg F and P Res members on Class “B” or “C” Reserve Service of the PRV checklist items in Part 1; and
Completion by P Res members on Class “A” Reserve Service of the PRV checklist items in Part 1, except medical and dental items which a member may be required to complete if the opportunity exists and resources are available.

Note – Medical and dental items for P Res members on Class “A” Reserve Service should be completed when available through CAF resources, but members should, at a minimum, routinely see their civilian doctor and dentist through their provincial health care system and the Reserve Dental Care Plan in order to maintain health and to ensure readiness for domestic operations.

Unique military occupation and environment-specific requirements	
Completion of specified PRV checklist items in Part 2 only when ordered by the CoC.

Domestic operations, international deployments of any duration and any unaccompanied operational posting of 365 days or more	
Completion of Tier 2 PRV checklist items in accordance with:
the CDIO for CJOC-led operations; and
CANSOFCOM directives and orders for CANSOFCOM operations.

Note – CAF members, who are augmentees assigned to an operation where the unit in theatre is formed of CAF members from various CAF units, are required to undergo PRV screening to the same standard as CAF members of formed units.


HTU or HTP	
Identification and notification by the applicable CM of a CAF member for an HTU or HTP;
Completion of Tier 2 PRV checklist items in accordance with the CDIO 1000 series or CANSOFCOM Commander’s Directive 27-07 (only available on the Joint Staff Information System);
Provision by the losing unit of screening results to the CM and gaining unit within 30 days of the initial notification; and
Issuance by the CM of posting instructions upon notification that PRV checklist items have green status.

Note – A CAF member selected for an HTU or HTP must maintain PRV checklist items for Parts 1, 2 and 3 with current and green status.


OUTCAN posting
	
Completion of forms:
DND 4064-E, Outside of Canada (OUTCAN) Posting – Screening Checklist;
DND 4210-E, OUTCAN Screening Level 1 – Immunization; and
DND 4215-E, OUTCAN Screening Level 6 – Director of Medical Policy.

Isolated or semi-isolated posting	
Completion of form DND 4176-E, Posting Screening for Isolated Posting and Isolated Units.

Update of PRV Checklist Items

4.10 Authorized personnel, within their area of expertise, must update PRV checklist items (e.g. medical staff must update medical category) when a CAF member completes the activity associated with the item.

4.11 If a CAF member has a PRV checklist item with a red status for any of the items in Tier 2 Part 3, the losing unit CO must evaluate the deficiency and make a recommendation to the CM or the applicable force employer regarding the suitability of the CAF member for the tasking, posting or deployment, and must advise the gaining unit CO.

PRV Screening Reports

4.12 PRV screening reports contain data extracted from the information entered in HRMS. The HRMS Readiness Verification Status Report provides individual reporting on the readiness status of a CAF member while batch PRV reports provide Comds with a summary of the readiness level of their command, formation and subordinate units. The reports also provide COs, and their administrative and operational staff, with detailed readiness information for the CAF members in their area of responsibility. It is therefore essential that the information entered in HRMS be up-to-date to ensure accurate reporting.

Top of page

5. Compliance and Consequences

Compliance

5.1 CAF members must comply with this DAOD. Should clarification of the policies or instructions set out in this DAOD be required, CAF members may seek direction through their chain of command, as appropriate. Military supervisors have the primary responsibility for and means of ensuring the compliance of their CAF members with this DAOD.

Consequences of Non-Compliance

5.2 CAF members are accountable to their respective military supervisors for any failure to comply with the direction set out in this DAOD. Non-compliance with this DAOD may result in an administrative or disciplinary action, or both. 

Top of page

6. Responsibilities

Responsibility Table

6.1 The following table identifies the responsibilities associated with this DAOD:

The …	is or are responsible for ...


force generators and force employers

	
providing guidance to CMP on required changes to this DAOD as a result of operational imperatives;
 informing applicable CMs if any additional HTUs or HTPs are designated;
notifying applicable CMs if a unit is no longer designated as an HTU or a position is no longer designated as an HTP; and
 amending applicable instructions to reflect PRV policy changes.

Director General Military Personnel Strategic	
monitoring this DAOD to ensure that it continues to meet the needs of the CAF.



L1 advisors, Comds of commands and COs

	
ensuring that all CAF members have completed PRV screening as directed in this DAOD; and
monitoring to ensure that all PRV results are recorded in the HRMS.



authorized personnel

	
recording PRV checklist items in the HRMS, within their area of expertise, as soon as items have been updated or amended.



CAF members

	
completing the applicable and available PRV checklist items on or before their expiry date; and
verifying that the status of their PRV checklist items is completed or updated in accordance with paragraph 4.4.

Top of page

7. References
Acts, Regulations, Central Agency Policies, and Policy DAOD

Privacy Act
DAOD 5009-0, Personnel Readiness

Other References

DAOD 5002-3, Component and Sub-Component Transfer
DAOD 5003-0, Restrictions on Duty and Individual Limitations
DAOD 5023-0, Universality of Service
DAOD 5023-1, Minimum Operational Standards Related to Universality of Service
DAOD 5023-2, Common Military Tasks Fitness Evaluation
DAOD 5044-1, Families
DAOD 5044-3, Deployment Support Groups
DAOD 5516-2, Conscientious Objection
DAOD 5516-4, Restrictions of Duty
CFAO 20-50, Assignment To and From Posts Outside Canada
CFAO 35-2, Dental Examinations
CANFORGEN 082/07, PERSTEMPO Policy for CF International Operations
CANFORGEN 052/11, OUTCAN Posting – Team Approach to Candidate Screening
CANFORGEN 101/16, Process Changes Related to Transfer of Pension Administration to Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC)
A-MD-007-089/JD-000, Canadian Forces Dental Care Plan
A-MD-154-000/FP-000, Canadian Armed Forces Medical Standards
A-PH-007-000/AG-001, Canadian Armed Forces Unclassified Imagery Instructions
B-GL-383-003/FP-001, Individual Battle Task Standards for Land Operations
CDS Directive 003 on CAF COVID-19 Vaccination for Operations and Readiness
VCDS Directive – Out–of-Canada (OUTCAN) Governance and Command and Control
CDIO 1000 series, Section 3, Personnel Administration
Canadian Forces Health Services Group Instruction 5020-34, Screening for Postings to Isolated and Semi-Isolated Sites within Canada
Canadian Forces Health Services Group Instruction 5020-66, Screening for Outside of Canada Postings
Canadian Forces Dental Order 1023-02, Screening For Postings Outside Canada and Isolated Locations Inside Canada
Canadian Forces Dental Order 1023-04, Dental Screening Examination for International Operational Deployments
CANSOFCOM Commander’s Directive 27-07, Reintegration and Decompression (only available on the Joint Staff Information System)
Military Human Resources Records Procedures (MHRRP)
Record of Decisions – Armed Forces Council Meeting 06/05, 14 June 2005 (available in paper copy only)
Form CF 30-1-E, Will (DAOD 7012-1A)
Form CF 30-3-E, Will Certificate (DAOD 7012-1C)
Form CF 742, Emergency Contact(s) Notification
Form CF-FC 2196 (PWGSC), Naming or substitution of a beneficiary
Form DND 404, Driver Permit
Form DND 2105, Designation of Memorial Cross Recipients
Form DND 2587, Next of Kin (NOK) Identification
Form DND 2886-E, Family Care Plan (FCP) Declaration
Form DND 4064-E, Outside of Canada (OUTCAN) Posting - Screening Checklist (available in English only)
Form DND 4176-E, Posting Screening for Isolated Posting and Isolated Units
Form DND 4210-E, OUTCAN Screening Level 1 – Immunization
Form DND 4215-E, OUTCAN Screening Level 6 – Director of Medical Policy
Form DND 4216-E, Post Deployment Assessment
Form DND 4217-E, Post Deployment Follow-up Review Note
CJOC J7 Mission Training SharePoint Home Page (available in English only)
Military Foreign Service Section (MFSS) OUTCAN Coordination and Support, intranet site
Canadian Forces Morale and Welfare Services, website

Top of page

Page details
Date modified: 2017-06-26
About this site
National Defence
Contact us
News
Jobs
Government of Canada
All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government
Themes and topics
Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finance
Science and innovation
Indigenous peoples
Veterans and military
Youth
Government of Canada Corporate
Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy
